Hello and welcome.
In this lecture we are going to be implementing rolling resistance so he can see I've got my car going
up at the limits of the air resistance and what I'm going to do is I'm going to take my foot off the
accelerator and see how we slow down so slowing down slowly it's slowing down.
But we've now got the extra resistance of rolling resistance on top of our air resistance so the air
resistance was limiting our top speed and making it harder and harder to accelerate.
But the rolling resistance is kind of acting at the lower end when we're slowing down.
It's still applying force whereas the air resistance was not applying force which means that with the
rolling resistance we're going to eventually come to a total standstill like this very much like a real
car would.
So let's dive in and see what this rolling resistance thing is all about and how we can implement it.
Unreal.
So rolling resistance may be familiar to some of you who are into motor sports or mountain biking because
we often try and minimize our rolling resistance on wheeled vehicles.
It is something that comes about because our wheels are usually squishy Rob and hard.
That's obviously desirable because our roads aren't perfectly flat so otherwise we end up with lots
of bumps.
But it does mean that we get a resistance to movement when we are rolling these tyres.
How does it work exactly.
Well there is a formula given and lots and lots of detail here in the Wikipedia article so I'm not going
to go over everything.
But we are going to pick up that part.
The formula that is given here the rolling resistance coefficient formula.
And as you can see it is well let's pick it apart shall we.
I've got a slide here.
So the rolling resistance is equal to the rolling resistance coefficient multiplied by something called
the normal force so you can see that basically it is related linearly to the normal force.
And I can tell you straight away that the normal force has nothing to do with the loss.
So essentially as far as velocity is concerned this is a constant force applying against us which is
why it can help us come to a stop.
Okay so let's investigate all the normal forces so far we've been looking at our portion.
We've had resistance going backwards.
We've had driving force going forwards more about going up and down while actually the normal force
is a force that pushes up.
It's the ground pushing up on our car.
And why is it pushing up because you'd imagine if it were just pushing up there's nothing pushing down
it would fly off into the sky.
Well it's counteracting the force of gravity.
Otherwise we'd be plummeting through the ground.
The ground is applying a force to keep us there so that we don't go accelerating through the ground.
This force due to gravity by for some of the you are interested is equal to the mass of the object multiplied
by G which is the acceleration due to gravity and on earth G tends to be nine point eight one.
And on other planets such as the moon it will be lower because they are smaller planets and their gravity
is less strong.
And on some planets where the gravity is even stronger them on the earth such as the sun then G will
be a much much larger number.
But we aren't too interested in that we just want to figure out what G is in unreel So how do we figure
out what G is in and real.
Well let's go and have a look and see if we can find it.
It's actually a property of the world.
So what we're going to do.
And you can follow along with this is if we go into tick we can get hold of the property the gravity
property of the Earth or at least the world that we're on which is going to try and simulate the earth
so we can do a GET world and then we're going to need our head a file for the world because we vowed
to use the arrow operators so it's going to be include engine forward slash world.
H.
And then in batam we are going to do so.
Get world.
We are going to do an arrow and we're going to look for gravity.
You could obviously search in the documentation I'm not going to show you the documentation page.
Well we've done that many times already so we can do a get grouty Z.
Now what I want to do is go ahead and print that out so that you know what that looks like so I'm going
to do a ewy Log log a temp warning.
Text and the text is going to be gravity.
And I am going to print it out as the float because that's what it is and then we got our get gravity
which just check.
Yep it is a float.
And we can go ahead and build that three of semicha on the end of the line and I believe everything
we log under you.
E underscore log is what I needed to type.
Go build that and see what AB gravity comes back at.
Okay so the build was successful Let's go over into unreel and play.
We should be able to stop straight away because we can see already in there that we've got negative.
Now that's interesting.
Nine hundred and eighty.
Why is that because it's using the unreel units of centimetres.
So it's going to be a hundred times larger than the standard units which are meters which is nine point
eight.
And obviously there's a negative sign in front of this as well that we didn't put there.
That negative sign is implying that it is in the z direction.
It is negative it's down towards the ground.
Okay so we're going to do a little bit of conversion to get g from this.
It's fairly straightforward it's going to be a float minus and then it's going to be this gravity thing.
And it's going to be divided by 100 to get rid of the unreal units.
And we could call that G or acceleration due to gravity but woese a capital A.
Because that's the real convention.
So acceleration due to gravity is equal to this whole thing.
So we can remove the log message now and we know how to find gravity and real so the next step is implementing
that rolling resistance.
And that's fairly straightforward so I'm going to leave it as a challenge to you now that you know what
the formula for rolling resistance is.
You can go ahead and implement it add rolling resistance try different coefficients Wikipedia has a
list of coefficients that are common.
How long does it take to stop.
Try it out and tweak your coefficient of rolling resistance to your satisfaction pulls the video and
have a go.
Okay welcome back.
So first things first we've got a get resistance function.
Now I don't like that this is called get resistance because actually get air resistance.
So let's call it that get air resistance.
And I am going to copy it from the head a file to where we use it in both where we declare it in the
key and where we use it in that take and then we're going to opportunistically create another one which
is going to be get rolling resistance.
And I am going to go ahead and declare that one in the head a file actually by copying the get air resistance.
Pasting it because I have exact same signature and copying and pasting the name get rolling resistance
as well.
They'll copy that all over in to our C++ file.
Where I'm going to add the namespace code on colon and I'm going to remove the semicolon at a body.
Okay simple stuff but has to be done.
So we're going to return the negative again and the direction is still going to be that gets safe normal
because we're going to be going against the velocity the rolling resistance is still a resistance so
it acts against the direction of motion.
So that's how we're going to get the direction in to our valley.
Next up we need to have a coefficient of rolling resistance so we can go ahead and copy add drag coefficient
comment and all and we are going to rename drag coefficient to rolling resistance.
Coefficient.
And I am going to take a value from the Wikipedia article.
Let's go n look at the table that they have there and you can see that they have a section that says
ordinary tyres on concrete as the description and it says it's between not point not one and not point
not one.
5 I'm going to pick the larger of the two.
Just because.
And I'm going to set that as a default value for our rolling resistance coefficient.
And I'm going to change the comment to a higher means more rolling resistance.
Okay fair enough.
So we're good.
That is our rolling resistance set at least an hour an hour go into the C plus plus And yes that's all
looking okay now we just need to actually implement that formula.
So we're going to have our rolling resistance coefficient as the first thing multiplied by.
And this is going to be an normal force that we don't have that defined yet.
So let's define that normal force that's going to be float normal force.
So it's not a force vector but just it's force magnitude.
But that's okay because we know that the direction is being got at from the get velocity.
And then we are going to create this.
And as I said the normal force is equal to but opposite to the gravitational force.
So we can go ahead and look at this gravitational forces M times g so m times g is mass times g and
g we have already calculated acceleration due to gravity tick can move in out of tick and move it into
our get rolling resistance instead.
So calculate the acceleration due to gravity it's mass multiplied by the acceleration due to gravity
gives us the normal force then there's normal forces multiplied by the rolling resistance which gives
us the rolling resistance force.
Okay so that then gets added in to our force vector and hopefully we will get a decent rolling resistance.
Let's give it a shot shall we.
Okay so that finished building let's go and test the out plane.
And accelerating up.
Up up up up up.
Turn around a bend.
Still accelerating celebrating accelerating accelerating when I get round the bend I will release I
go.
I have released the accelerator and you can see I'm definitely slowing down better than I was with the
air resistance slowing down slowing down and the idea is that we should come to a complete stop.
Might take a little bit of time because the rolling resistance that we have chosen is actually pretty
low because cars he knew have actually quite efficient in terms of their rolling resistance at least
and we keep going but you can see that we're going to come to a stop slowly.
And there we go.
Complete standstill now and we can turn on the spot unfortunately but we're definitely definitely a
complete standstill which we couldn't really get to in a sensible amount of time with just the air resistance.
So I'm fairly happy with that.
It's quite light.
It does slow down pretty slowly so I might tweak it up but I'll choose to do that at a later time.
At the moment it feels like we got we've got a good feel.
Feels like a road car more or less and it accelerates well enough and we slow down well enough.
I'm pretty happy with that now.
There are a few the weedy things like the fact we can rotate on the spot when we stood completely still.
That's a bit odd isn't it.
But also another strange thing is that we when we reverse that go reverse thing we actually stay in
the opposite direction to what you'd expect.
You can't tell but try this for yourself.
If you try and steer using the arrow keys were going to steer in the opposite direction so it is going
to fix some of these oddities in the next lecture.
I'll see you there.